

MitoProt II for Unix is a  free software permitting the
study and prediction of mitochondrion-related proteins. The software has been
compiled on Sun Sparcstation with Gnat compiler. Sources are available
to install on other platform.

If you use it to publish anything, we would be pleased if you cite it 
among your references:

MitoProt 1.0 [studies about mitochondrial targeting sequences (MTSs)]
M. G. Claros (1995) "MitoProt, a Macintosh application for studying
mitochondrial proteins". Comput. Applic. Biosci. 11, 441-447.

MitoProt II (prediction of MTS and mitochondrial proteins)
M.G. Claros, P. Vincens. "Computational method to predict
mitochondrial proteins and their targeting sequences". Eur. J.
Biochem., (1996) 241, 779-786.

If you find this on-line help incomplete, we recommend that you read
the previous cited articles.

INSTALLATION

Unless you grabbed a binary distribution of Mitoprot II, you must compile
it for your specific platform.  In order to compile it, you must
use an ADA 95 compiler. Gnat compiler is free available at 
https://libre2.adacore.com/

The step to install this program are:
  1/ if it is not available on your system, install Gnat compiler. 

  2/ uncompress and untar the distribution file. Command could be: 
         zcat mitoprotII.tar.gz | tar xvf -
     This operation creates a new directory called "mitoprot-vXX"

  3/ compile the sources. You can use the Makefile available in the 
     distribution or gnatmake utilities.
     To use Makefile, first edit it and change the values of the variables
     CC and OPT, next execute the command "make".
     To use gnatmake, simply execute "gnatmake mitoprot"

  4/ install the program using the command "make install" after to have
     changed the value of the variable DEST in the Makefile 

For a binary distribution, the only step is to install the executable
To do it, you copy the binary file according to your hardware at a good
place (for example, in the directory /usr/local/bin). The name of
the binary file is mitoprot.<hardware>.<OS>. For instance,
mitoprot.sparc_solaris_2.9 is a compiled version for Solaris 2.9 or +
on Sparc systems.

The files in the distribution are:
  - README : general description of mitoprot
  - Instructions : this file
  - Makefile : the file to make the executable
  - mitoprot.solaris : executable for Solaris plateforme
  - mitoprot.adb : source main file
  - mito_parameters.ads : source file describing parameters
  - sequence_io.adb sequence_io.ads : source file to read sequences
  - sequence_package.adb sequence_package.ads : source file to 
                                                compute values of parameters
  - strlib.adb strlib.ads : source of string utilities
  - type_specifications.ads : source of general declaration


USAGE

The synopsis of mitoprot program is:

  mitoprot [-f a|p|s] [-o filename] sequence_data_file

  with:
   -f is an option to define the format of the sequence file. This format
      is specified with:
         * a if ascii format (the first lines beginning with
           the character ">" are ignored, the next lines contains sequence
           in one letter code). It is compatible with fasta format.
         * p if PIR format.
         * s if Swissprot format.

   -o generate a summary of the test displayed on one line in the
      file "filename".

   sequence_data_file is the name of the text file containing the
   sequence. Results are writed in a file with the suffix ".mitoprot".

SHORT PARAMETER DESCRIPTION

   Mitoprot produces an output giving the values of the next parameters
   o MitoProt calculates the N-terminal protein region that can support an
     MTS and the cleavage site. Thus, it searches for the existence of two
     close Glu or Asp within a determined distance. In that case, the 
     searching window is limited to the residue immediately before the 
     first Glu or Asp found. It is the ZoneTo parameter. 

   o Coef20 reflects the composition of the first 20 sequence residues.

   o CoefTot is a modification of Coef20 for taking into account
     more residues and the length corresponding to the Targeting zone
     (ZoneTo length).

   o ChDiff (Charge difference) reflects the protein's isoelectric point. 
     It is calculated in the entire sequence, representing the absolute 
     number of acidic (D + E) and basic (K + R) residues. 

   o KR and DE determines the number of Arg and Lys and Glu and Asp.

   o CleavSit gives the position of a putative cleavage site.
   
   o H17 is calculated as the maximal local hydrophobicity of a segment.

   o MesoH (Mesohydrophobicity) is the average regional hydrophobicity over
     an extended region of the sequence.

   o Hmax is the maximal hydrophobicity of 7 neighbouring residues on the
     maximal alpha segment. The neighbouring residues are considered in the
     helical wheel plot, not in the primary sequence. Seven residues are
     the limit for the scanning window because this is the size of the
     a-helix that is thought to interact with membranes. Alpha has 
     successively the values: 75, 95, 100 and 105 degre. 

   MitoProt provides four different hydrophobicity scales to added
   flexibility, and to enable comparison of results with different
   scales:
   o GES.- Engelman,D.M., Steitz,T.A., Goldman,A. (1986) Ann. Rev.
     Biophys. Biophys. Chem. 15, 321-530. This is recommended especially
     for studies about hydrophobic proteins because it quantifies the free
     energy of water-oil transfer for residues in an a-helical structure.
     This reflects the circumstances in which amino acids appear in
     proteins.
   o KD.- Kyte,J., Doolittle,R.F. (1982) J. Mol. Biol. 157, 105-32. This
     scale takes into account values from water-to-vapour energy transfers
     and from internal-external distribution of amino acid residues.
   o GVH1.- von Heijne,G. (1992) J. Mol. Biol. 225, 487-94. This is a
     statistical scale obtained from the amino acid frequencies in the
     central part of a transmembrane segment with respect to the
     non-membranous stretches.
   o ECS.- Eisenberg,D. (1984) Ann. Rev. Biochem. 53, 595-623. The
     "Eisenberg's consensus Scale" was designed to mitigate the effects of
     outlaying values in any one scale produced by the peculiarities of the
     method, and is simply an average of four scales. It gives better
     results than the OMH presented in older versions of MitoProt.
   H17, MesoH, MuHD, Hmax are determined for these four scales.

   The last part of the output is an array giving the prediction
   that a nuclear gene is exported in the mitochondria (for DFM)
   or chloroplast (for DFMC). These values are probabilities
   determined using the result of a discriminant analysis. 
       DFM  = Discriminant function for mitochondrial proteins.
       DFMC = Discriminant function for mitochondrial and 
              chloroplastic proteins. This function is not described
              in any paper. It's like DFM, but chloroplastic proteins
              are grouped with mitochondria proteins.


   A complete description of these parameters and the used method 
   to make the prediction is available in :
 
     MitoProt 1.0 [studies about mitochondrial targeting sequences (MTSs)]
     M. G. Claros (1995) "MitoProt, a Macintosh application for studying
     mitochondrial proteins". Comput. Applic. Biosci. 11, 441-447.

     MitoProt II (prediction of MTS and mitochondrial proteins)
     M.G. Claros, P. Vincens. "Computational method to predict
     mitochondrial proteins and their targeting sequences". Eur. J.
     Biochem. 241, 779-786.
 
DISCLAIMER
MitoProt is supplied "as is": it comes without any warranties, express
or implied, of any kind, including fitness for purpose and
merchantability. The authors will not be liable for any damages
whatsoever caused through the use of MitoProt, be they incidental,
consequential or otherwise. You may find some bugs too, or things
lacking which should be included. If you have comments, we would like
to know what they are, but we do not assure that we can resolve all
problems.

Permission is hereby granted to anyone to redistribute Mitoprot under
the "Mitoprot" name. We do not grant permission for the resale of Mitoprot,
but we do grant permission for vendors to bundle Mitoprot free with other 
software, or to charge a reasonable price for redistribution, provided 
it is made clear that Mitoprot is free. 
